DL blog Part2 (#43)
mlflow/mlflow-website: website/blog/2024-03-18-deep-learning-part-2/index.md

---
title: Fine Tuning LLMs with MLflow: Deep Learning with MLflow (Part 2)
description: Highlighting the recent improvements in MLflow for Deep Learning workflows
slug: deep-learning-part-1
authors: [abe-omorogbe, avinash-sooriyarachchi, puneet-jain]
tags: [Deep Learning]
thumbnail: img/blog/dl-chart-grouping.gif
---

![](deep-learning-pt2-min.jpg)

In the realm of deep learning, finetuning of pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) on private datasets stands as a critical application. This practice is not only common but also essential for developing specialized models, particularly for tasks like custom Named Entity Recognition (NER). In such scenarios, tools like MLflow are invaluable. They ensure that every aspect of the training process - metrics, parameters, and artifacts - are reproducibly tracked, logged, analyzed, compared, and shared. In this tutorial we are going to be using [MLflow 2.11](https://mlflow.org/releases/2.11.0) and [the new MLflow Deep Learning features](https://mlflow.org/blog/deep-learning-part-1) to track all the important aspects of this project.

# Use Case: Fine Tuning Llama2-7B for NER 

> A prime example of this application is the finetuning of an Llama2-7B pre-trained model for instruction following. The goal is to extract structured information from unstructured text, a task central to NER.  Selecting the Llama2 7B model is a strategic decision. Its size strikes a perfect balance, having a large enough parameter count to handle intricate tasks while remaining compact enough for fine tuning on a modest cluster of less powerful GPUs like Nvidia T4s, thanks to Parameter Efficient Fine Tuning (PEFT) methods. Additionally, it can be finetuned on a single A100 GPU utilizing PEFT techniques quite easily.

Reviewer: Recommend clarifying the task & providing a clear example, in the text, of input and expected output. It's not clear here whether it's instruction following, NER, or structured information extraction in a way that is central to, but still distinct from, NER.

![](NER.png)

[Named Entity Recognition ](https://www.turing.com/kb/a-comprehensive-guide-to-named-entity-recognition)example

# Setting Up MLflow for Fine tuning

The code provided below illustrates the setup for Fine tuning, augmented with MLflow integration. We have marked the sections used for MLflow tracking. At the beginning of the functions, MLflow is configured, initiating a run that automatically logs the experiment. The details of  `callback.py` will be discussed in a later section.

This example demonstrates how to set up a fine tuning job on Databricks. A similar setup can be achieved on any platform capable of supporting this type of workload.

```bash
!export DATABRICKS_TOKEN && export DATABRICKS_HOST && export MLFLOW_EXPERIMENT_NAME && export MLFLOW_FLATTEN_PARAMS &&  \
 export HF_MLFLOW_LOG_ARTIFACTS && export MLFLOW_ENABLE_SYSTEM_METRICS_LOGGING && cd .. && deepspeed \
--num_gpus='{num_gpus}' \
--module databricks_llm.fine_tune \
--final_model_output_path='{dbfs_output_location}' \
--output_dir="/local_disk0/output" \

> --dataset={dataset} \

Reviewer: Recommend identifying the dataset used & mentioning why it's suitable for the task. Just a sentence or two.

    environment variable `DISABLE_MLFLOW_INTEGRATION = TRUE`.
    """

  def on_save(self, args, state, control,model,tokenizer, **kwargs):
        if self._initialized and state.is_world_process_zero and self._log_artifacts:
           ckpt_dir = f"checkpoint-{state.global_step}"
  	 self._ml_flow.transformers.log_model(
                             transformers_model={
                                 "model": model,
                                 "tokenizer": tokenizer,
                             },
                             task="text-generation",
                             artifact_path=ckpt_dir,
                             pip_requirements=["torch", "transformers", "accelerate"],
                             input_example=input_example,
                             signature=signature,
                             metadata={"task": "llm/v1/completions"}
                         )
```

See detailed code block [here](https://github.com/puneet-jain159/fine_tuning_llm_with_mlflow_blog/blob/495c156f73435996706c42bfda4bb7519dc21dab/databricks_llm/callbacks.py#L64)

> In the code snippet above, we create a new callback class that includes an additional method, **on_save**, which logs the weights and tokenizer after **every n** steps/epochs. This frequency is configured as part of the training arguments using the Transformer library. Additionally, we can employ a custom pyfunc to perform the same activity. For an example, please refer to the link provided [here](https://github.com/puneet-jain159/fine_tuning_llm_with_mlflow_blog/blob/main/databricks_llm/callbacks.py).

Reviewer: When would one use the custom pyfunc approach vs the callback approach? Or do they both use callbacks, just a difference in model flavor?

Reviewer 2: They both use callbacks. just different model flavour. the current transformer flavour has a bug where the weights where not getting properly downloaded hence need to create a custom pyfunc flavour (should be resolved when the bug is fixed)

The custom callback gracefully saves the model checkpoints during the finetuning process. The mlflow\.transformers.log\_model expression saves the model and the tokenizer alongside the dependencies, input example and the model signature during each logging event.

> ## Scaling and Platform Considerations for Training

Reviewer: This is a subsection of "The Importance to Logging"—is it supposed to be? I don't see how it relates.

Author: Not sure I undestand the concern

# Evaluate checkpoints of Fine Tuned Model with MLflow

With your training process meticulously tracked and logged by MLflow, you have the flexibility to retrieve and test your model at any checkpoint. To do this, simply employ [mlflow.pyfunc.load\_model()](https://mlflow.org/docs/latest/python_api/mlflow.pyfunc.html?highlight=load_model#mlflow.pyfunc.load_model) to load the model from a specific run, and then use the[ .predict()](https://mlflow.org/docs/latest/python_api/mlflow.models.html?highlight=predict#mlflow.models.predict) method for evaluation.

In our example, we focus on the model checkpoint from the 900th epoch. We'll demonstrate how to test this model using a specific prompt and set parameters.

```python
import mlflow

loaded_model = mlflow.pyfunc.load_model(f"runs:/4b32ccd588794530bd66fd3557c4d42c/checkpoint-900")

# Make a prediction using the loaded model
loaded_model.predict(
    {"prompt": "check out Gaucho , near convent garden cost $50 for 2, nice columbian dishes",
     "temperature": 0.4,
     "max_tokens": 128,
    }
)

> ```

Reviewer: I recommend showing the result, and also a before/after—how did the model respond to an identical prompt prior to fine-tuning?

Author: Good idea

---
title: Fine Tuning LLMs with MLflow: Deep Learning with MLflow (Part 2)
description: Highlighting the recent improvements in MLflow for Deep Learning workflows
slug: deep-learning-part-1
authors: [abe-omorogbe, avinash-sooriyarachchi, puneet-jain]
tags: [Deep Learning]
thumbnail: img/blog/dl-chart-grouping.gif
---

![](deep-learning-pt2-min.jpg)

> In the realm of deep learning, finetuning of pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) on private datasets stands as a critical application. This practice is not only common but also essential for developing specialized models, particularly for tasks like custom Named Entity Recognition (NER). In such scenarios, tools like MLflow are invaluable. They ensure that every aspect of the training process - metrics, parameters, and artifacts - are reproducibly tracked, logged, analyzed, compared, and shared. In this tutorial we are going to be using [MLflow 2.11](https://mlflow.org/releases/2.11.0) and [the new MLflow Deep Learning features](https://mlflow.org/blog/deep-learning-part-1) to track all the important aspects of this project.

Reviewer 3: Link to 2.11.3 of MLflow

> In the realm of deep learning, finetuning of pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) on private datasets stands as a critical application. This practice is not only common but also essential for developing specialized models, particularly for tasks like custom Named Entity Recognition (NER). In such scenarios, tools like MLflow are invaluable. They ensure that every aspect of the training process - metrics, parameters, and artifacts - are reproducibly tracked, logged, analyzed, compared, and shared. In this tutorial we are going to be using [MLflow 2.11](https://mlflow.org/releases/2.11.0) and [the new MLflow Deep Learning features](https://mlflow.org/blog/deep-learning-part-1) to track all the important aspects of this project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the realm of deep learning, finetuning of pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) on private datasets stands as a critical application. This practice is not only common but also essential for developing specialized models, particularly for tasks like custom Named Entity Recognition (NER). In such scenarios, tools like MLflow are invaluable. They ensure that every aspect of the training process - metrics, parameters, and artifacts - are reproducibly tracked, logged, analyzed, compared, and shared. In this blog we are going to be using [MLflow 2.11](https://mlflow.org/releases/2.11.3) and [the new MLflow Deep Learning features](https://mlflow.org/blog/deep-learning-part-1) to track all the important aspects of this project.
```

# Use Case: Fine Tuning Llama2-7B for NER on Restaurant data

> 

Reviewer 3: PEFT should be explained here as there are references below to benefits and functionality within the huggingface library that are incorrectly assumed that a reader would have. 2-3 sentences that explain what it is and how it is a cost-effective and generally more accurate means of performing model customization would be an effective primer to the rest of the blog.

> Let's consider fine-tuning a Llama2-7B model for following instructions embedded within text. This is a specific example of how Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) can be applied for real-world tasks. The goal here is to  extract structured information based on instructions, which goes beyond simple Named Entity Recognition (NER).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let's consider the use case of fine-tuning a Llama2-7B model for use as a tool for extracting instructive contexts that are embedded within bodies of text. This is a specific example of how Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) can be applied for real-world tasks. The goal here is to  extract structured information based on instructions, which goes beyond simple Named Entity Recognition (NER).
```

> Let's consider the use case of fine-tuning a Llama2-7B model for use as a tool for extracting instructive contexts that are embedded within bodies of text. This is a specific example of how Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) can be applied for real-world tasks. The goal here is to  extract structured information based on instructions, which goes beyond simple Named Entity Recognition (NER).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let's consider the use case of fine-tuning a Llama2-7B model for use as a tool for extracting instructive contexts that are embedded within bodies of text. This is a specific example of how Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) can be applied for real-world tasks. The goal for this use case is to extract structured information based on instructions, which goes beyond simple Named Entity Recognition (NER).
```

> Imagine a scenario where the instruction is: `The Punter is an expensive Chinese coffee shop located near Café Sicilia.` The model, after fine-tuning, would then process the unstructured text of the sentence and identify the entities, presenting them in a structured format like a list. 

Reviewer 3: A list? This is a mapping, right?

> Imagine a scenario where the instruction is: `The Punter is an expensive Chinese coffee shop located near Café Sicilia.` The model, after fine-tuning, would then process the unstructured text of the sentence and identify the entities, presenting them in a structured format like a list. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Imagine a scenario where the instruction is: `The Punter is an expensive Chinese coffee shop located near Café Sicilia.` The model, after fine-tuning, would then process the unstructured text of the sentence and identify the entities, presenting them in a structured mapping of named entity types to their values. 
```

Example of extracting information from `The Punter is an expensive Chinese coffee shop located near Café Sicilia.`: 
```python
Business name: The Punter

> Cusine: Chinese

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Cuisine: Chinese
```

descriptor: expensive
location: Café Sicilia
```

> The Llama2-7B model's size is strategically chosen. It has enough parameters (complexity) to handle intricate tasks like understanding instructions within text, but remains  compact enough for fine-tuning on even a modest cluster of less powerful GPUs like Nvidia T4s, thanks to PEFT methods. It can even be fine-tuned on a single high-end A100 GPU with PEFT.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Llama2-7B model's size is strategically chosen. It has enough parameters (complexity) to handle intricate tasks like understanding instructions within text, but remains compact enough for fine-tuning on even a modest cluster of less powerful GPUs like Nvidia T4s, thanks to the PEFT methodology. It can even be fine-tuned on a single high-end A100 GPU with PEFT.
```

> The Llama2-7B model's size is strategically chosen. It has enough parameters (complexity) to handle intricate tasks like understanding instructions within text, but remains  compact enough for fine-tuning on even a modest cluster of less powerful GPUs like Nvidia T4s, thanks to PEFT methods. It can even be fine-tuned on a single high-end A100 GPU with PEFT.

Reviewer 2: Rephrase 
The Llama2-7B model's size is strategically chosen. It has enough parameters (complexity) to handle intricate tasks like understanding instructions within text, but remains compact enough for fine-tuning on even a modest cluster of less powerful GPUs like Nvidia T4s. It can even be fine-tuned on a single high-end A100 GPU with PEFT

> 

Reviewer 2: Delete line

> The Llama2-7B model's size is strategically chosen. It has enough parameters (complexity) to handle intricate tasks like understanding instructions within text, but remains compact enough for fine-tuning on even a modest cluster of less powerful GPUs like Nvidia T4s, thanks to the PEFT methodology. It can even be fine-tuned on a single high-end A100 GPU with PEFT.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Llama2-7B model's size is strategically chosen. It has enough parameters (complexity) to handle intricate tasks like understanding instructions within text, but remains compact enough for fine-tuning on even a modest cluster of less powerful GPUs (such as Nvidia T4s), thanks to the PEFT methodology. Alternatively, it can be fine-tuned on a single high-end A100 GPU by using PEFT (as opposed to a non-PEFT fine tuning operation, which would require significantly more resources).
```

PEFT techniques focus on keeping the pre-trained model parameters frozen and only training a small number of additional layers for the specific task. This saves memory and training time.

> Overall, fine-tuning Llama2-7B with PEFT is a promising approach for instruction following tasks and similar applications that require working with large models on limited resources.

Reviewer 2: rephrase 
Overall, fine-tuning Llama2-7B  is a promising approach for instruction following tasks and similar applications that require working with large models on limited resources.

# Setting Up MLflow for Fine tuning

The code provided below illustrates the setup for Fine tuning, augmented with MLflow integration. We have marked the sections used for MLflow tracking. At the beginning of the functions, MLflow is configured, initiating a run that automatically logs the experiment. The details of  `callback.py` will be discussed in a later section.

This example demonstrates how to set up a fine tuning job on Databricks. A similar setup can be achieved on any platform capable of supporting this type of workload.

We are using the [e2e_nlg](https://huggingface.co/datasets/e2e_nlg) dataset as it is a great dataset is used for training end-to-end, data-driven natural language generation systems in the restaurant domain

> ```bash

Reviewer 3: Do we need to present this in this way? Is the intention to show readers how to execute a script within a notebook, or is it to show how to build the model training logic that integrates with MLflow? 
I'm not convinced that this is useful to include.

--gradient_checkpointing=true \
--gradient_accumulation_steps=1 \
--learning_rate=1e-6 \
--lr_scheduler_type="cosine" \
--warmup_steps=50 \
--evaluation_strategy="steps" \
--save_strategy="steps" \
--save_steps=100 \
--num_train_epochs=3\
--run_name="{pretrained_name_or_path}-blog-run"
``````
See code details [here](https://github.com/puneet-jain159/fine_tuning_llm_with_mlflow_blog/blob/495c156f73435996706c42bfda4bb7519dc21dab/notebooks/run_deepspeed_fine_tuning.py#L117)

In the above code block we are doing the following: Logging system metrics with MLFlow ensures that CPU stats, GPU stats, memory usage, network traffic, and disk usage during the training process is logged. Particularly, the ability to log and track GPU utilization during a training run is critical and thus being able to log it intermittently is particularly useful. The training run is parametrized such that the model is trained for 3 epochs, with checkpoints saved and metrics logged every 100 training steps. The run is given an appropriate name based on the path of the pretrained model.

The diagram below is a visualization of how finetuning and MLflow fit together.

![](finetune_with_MLflow.png)

> Using MLflow while fine tuning ML model in Databricks

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using MLflow while fine tuning a DL model in Databricks
```

> # The Importance of Logging

Reviewer 3: H1 is for the title of the blog; please use h2 for major section headers and h3 for subsection headers

The integration of the Hugging Face trainer callback with MLFlow plays a pivotal role in this ecosystem. It allows for comprehensive tracking and logging of metrics, parameters, and artifacts during model finetuning. This logging can be configured flexibly – at every epoch, after a set number of epochs, or steps. Importantly, it can cover the entire model checkpoint or be limited to just the adapter when using [PEFT (Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning)](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/index) methods like [QLoRA](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14314). We have highlighted the additional code necessary for MLflow to log every epoch and checkpoint.

## Configuring Hugging Face Trainer Callback for MLflow

```python
class CustomMLflowCallback(MLflowCallback):
    """
    A [`TrainerCallback`] that sends the logs to [MLflow](https://www.mlflow.org/). Can be disabled by setting
    environment variable `DISABLE_MLFLOW_INTEGRATION = TRUE`.
    """

  def on_save(self, args, state, control,model,tokenizer, **kwargs):
        if self._initialized and state.is_world_process_zero and self._log_artifacts:
           ckpt_dir = f"checkpoint-{state.global_step}"

>   	 self._ml_flow.transformers.log_model(

Reviewer 3: What is the reason for patching log_model? 
You shouldn't split the naming like this of `mlflow` to `_ml_flow`. `_mlflow` would be sufficient. 
I'm not sure what the intention of having an object instance reference to mlflow is, though. Why not set an object attr that indicates whether mlflow is installed and importable and adjust logic within the instance methods to handle calls after wrapping the import in a try/catch. 
I'm also a bit reticent in showing users an example of using PEFT that defines manually overriding pip_requirements (an anti-pattern). Is the reason for not using the standard flavor purely so that you can do checkpointing during training?
If the intention of the blog is to show off auto-checkpointing, it might be a better idea to use a torch or TF example that has this directly supported with standard public APIs. Transformers doesn't yet have this functionality (namely due to no one asking for it) and I feel like this example is entirely far too complex for people to read through.

                                 "tokenizer": tokenizer,
                             },
                             task="text-generation",
                             artifact_path=ckpt_dir,
                             pip_requirements=["torch", "transformers", "accelerate"],
                             input_example=input_example,
                             signature=signature,
                             metadata={"task": "llm/v1/completions"}
                         )
```

See detailed code block [here](https://github.com/puneet-jain159/fine_tuning_llm_with_mlflow_blog/blob/495c156f73435996706c42bfda4bb7519dc21dab/databricks_llm/callbacks.py#L64)

In the code snippet above, we create a new callback class that includes an additional method, **on_save**, which logs the weights and tokenizer after **every n** steps/epochs. This frequency is configured as part of the training arguments using the Transformer library. Additionally, we can employ a custom pyfunc to perform the same activity. For an example, please refer to the link provided [here](https://github.com/puneet-jain159/fine_tuning_llm_with_mlflow_blog/blob/main/databricks_llm/callbacks.py).

> The custom callback gracefully saves the model checkpoints during the finetuning process. The mlflow\.transformers.log\_model expression saves the model and the tokenizer alongside the dependencies, input example and the model signature during each logging event.

Reviewer 3: This saves both PEFT weights, the component elements, and the foundation model weights with each checkpoint? 
This is definitely not something that we would want to show users as it would make a static copy of the foundation model for each checkpoint (and the approach of PEFT doesn't modify the foundation model at all), causing extreme file duplication and a massive slowdown to the training process as it serializes massive files with each n training iterations. 
While saving the PEFT weights might make sense (I'm not familiar with how long it takes to use PEFT training with this model), do we want to show users a customized implementation of checkpointing for this library? 
I think that showing the happy path of the new features introduced in 2.11 is more relevant than showing something like this, particularly since this will likely increase the training time to the point that a user would feel very frustrated at the sheer volume of copied data being generated and how long it would take to run (which would directly cause them to assume that MLflow is terrible for PEFT).

## Scaling and Platform Considerations for Training

> To effectively scale the finetuning of your training, it's essential to select the right platform infrastructure that offers the necessary compute resources. Platforms like Databricks provide options for both single-node multi-GPU finetuning and multi-node multi-GPU training, which are crucial for scaling your processes. Coupled with efficient library management on the Databricks platform, these resources can significantly streamline the development process.

Reviewer 3: This doesn't belong in the OSS blog.
